---
layout: redirect
redirect: https://pennshenlab.giothub.io/Test/Hardware
title: "Hardware"
parent: "Test"
nav_order: 2
has_toc: true
---



## Wrist-worn actigraphy in agitated late-stage dementia patients: A feasibility study on digital inclusion.

BACKGROUND: Wrist-worn actigraphy can be an objective tool to assess sleep and other behavioral and psychological symptoms in dementia (BPSD). We investigated the feasibility of using wearable actigraphy in agitated late-stage dementia patients. METHODS: Agitated, late-stage Alzheimer's dementia care home residents in Greater London area (n = 29; 14 females, mean age +- SD: 80.8 +- 8.2; 93.1% White) were recruited to wear an actigraphy watch for 4 weeks. Wearing time was extracted to evaluate compliance, and factors influencing compliance were explored. RESULTS: A high watch-acceptance (96.6%) and compliance rate (88.0%) was noted. Non-compliance was not associated with age or BPSD symptomatology. However, participants with "better" cognitive function (R = 0.42, p = 0.022) and during nightshift (F1.240, 33.475  = 8.075, p = 0.005) were less compliant. Female participants were also marginally less compliant (F1, 26  = 3.790, p = 0.062). DISCUSSIONS: Wrist-worn actigraphy appears acceptable and feasible in late-stage agitated dementia patients. Accommodating the needs of both the patients and their carers may further improve compliance.

URL:


## Usability and acceptability of wearable technology in the early detection of dementia.

BACKGROUND: The Early Detection of Neurodegeneration (EDoN) is a global initiative that aims to explore the potential of wearable technologies and smartphone applications to detect preclinical dementia, with aspirations to validate a digital toolkit for clinical practice. To enhance the development of an inclusive digital toolkit, we conducted a study to assess the usability and acceptability of different digital devices in people with cognitive impairments and their carers. METHOD: Recruitment was conducted across various UK networks such as Join Dementia Research. Participants received the EDoN toolkit, which includes a smartwatch (Fitbit Charge 4), EEG headband (Dreem 3) and two smartphone applications (Longevity and Mezurio). Guides were provided to support the setup process. Initial interviews were conducted approximately three days after the participant received the devices, to explore initial perspectives regarding the toolkit and experiences of the setup process. Follow-up interviews were conducted two weeks later to explore the acceptability and usability of the toolkit. NVivo was used to thematically analyse the interview transcripts. Emerging themes were discussed and refined by the research group. RESULT: Sixteen semi-structured interviews were conducted with nine participants, at two-time points. Four participants had mild cognitive impairment, two had frontotemporal dementia, one had Alzheimer's and two were carers. We identified three key themes, which centred around usability, acceptability and inequity. Participants expressed the wearable devices were comfortable but individuals with physical disabilities or cognitive impairments struggled to use some devices. Participants valued the feedback the devices provided such as information on sleep and heart rate, although some information was not fully understood. Participants also shared their concerns around detecting preclinical dementia and the increased anxiety around the consequences of this such as "being put in a home". Various inequities of the toolkit were uncovered such as digital exclusion relating to a lack of access to strong WiFi connection, compatible smartphones and poor digital literacy. CONCLUSION: These results are informative for the further development of user-friendly digital tools for the early detection of dementia. Further work is required to ensure a digital toolkit is inclusive and provides information that can be understood by the user.

URL:


## Artificial intelligence-coupled plasmonic infrared sensor for detection of structural protein biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases.

Diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs) including Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease is challenging owing to the lack of tools to detect preclinical biomarkers. The misfolding of proteins into oligomeric and fibrillar aggregates plays an important role in the development and progression of NDDs, thus underscoring the need for structural biomarker-based diagnostics. We developed an immunoassay-coupled nanoplasmonic infrared metasurface sensor that detects proteins linked to NDDs, such as alpha-synuclein, with specificity and differentiates the distinct structural species using their unique absorption signatures. We augmented the sensor with an artificial neural network enabling unprecedented quantitative prediction of oligomeric and fibrillar protein aggregates in their mixture. The microfluidic integrated sensor can retrieve time-resolved absorbance fingerprints in the presence of a complex biomatrix and is capable of multiplexing for the simultaneous monitoring of multiple pathology-associated biomarkers. Thus, our sensor is a promising candidate for the clinical diagnosis of NDDs, disease monitoring, and evaluation of novel therapies.

URL:


## Portable, low-field magnetic resonance imaging for evaluation of Alzheimer's disease.

Portable, low-field magnetic resonance imaging (LF-MRI) of the brain may facilitate point-of-care assessment of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) in settings where conventional MRI cannot. However, image quality is limited by a lower signal-to-noise ratio. Here, we optimize LF-MRI acquisition and develop a freely available machine learning pipeline to quantify brain morphometry and white matter hyperintensities (WMH). We validate the pipeline and apply it to outpatients presenting with mild cognitive impairment or dementia due to AD. We find hippocampal volumes from <= 3 mm isotropic LF-MRI scans have agreement with conventional MRI and are more accurate than anisotropic counterparts. We also show WMH volume has agreement between manual segmentation and the automated pipeline. The increased availability and reduced cost of LF-MRI, in combination with our machine learning pipeline, has the potential to increase access to neuroimaging for dementia.

URL:


## Associations between the multitrajectory neuroplasticity of neuronavigated rTMS-mediated angular gyrus networks and brain gene expression in AD spectrum patients with sleep disorders.

INTRODUCTION: The multifactorial influence of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) on neuroplasticity in neural networks is associated with improvements in cognitive dysfunction and sleep disorders. The mechanisms of rTMS and the transcriptional-neuronal correlation in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients with sleep disorders have not been fully elucidated. METHODS: Forty-six elderly participants with cognitive impairment (23 patients with low sleep quality and 23 patients with high sleep quality) underwent 4-week periods of neuronavigated rTMS of the angular gyrus and neuroimaging tests, and gene expression data for six post mortem brains were collected from another database. Transcription-neuroimaging association analysis was used to evaluate the effects on cognitive dysfunction and the underlying biological mechanisms involved. RESULTS: Distinct variable neuroplasticity in the anterior and posterior angular gyrus networks was detected in the low sleep quality group. These interactions were associated with multiple gene pathways, and the comprehensive effects were associated with improvements in episodic memory. DISCUSSION: Multitrajectory neuroplasticity is associated with complex biological mechanisms in AD-spectrum patients with sleep disorders. HIGHLIGHTS: This was the first transcription-neuroimaging study to demonstrate that multitrajectory neuroplasticity in neural circuits was induced via neuronavigated rTMS, which was associated with complex gene expression in AD-spectrum patients with sleep disorders. The interactions between sleep quality and neuronavigated rTMS were coupled with multiple gene pathways and improvements in episodic memory. The present strategy for integrating neuroimaging, rTMS intervention, and genetic data provide a new approach to comprehending the biological mechanisms involved in AD.

URL:


## Mapping sleep's oscillatory events as a biomarker of Alzheimer's disease.

INTRODUCTION: Memory-associated neural circuits produce oscillatory events including theta bursts (TBs), sleep spindles (SPs), and slow waves (SWs) in sleep electroencephalography (EEG). Changes in the "coupling" of these events may indicate early Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. METHODS: We analyzed 205 aging adults using single-channel sleep EEG, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers, and Clinical Dementia Rating  (CDR ) scale. We mapped SW-TB and SW-SP neural circuit coupling precision to amyloid positivity, cognitive impairment, and CSF AD biomarkers. RESULTS: Cognitive impairment correlated with lower TB spectral power in SW-TB coupling. Cognitively unimpaired, amyloid positive individuals demonstrated lower precision in SW-TB and SW-SP coupling compared to amyloid negative individuals. Significant biomarker correlations were found in oscillatory event coupling with CSF Abeta42 /Abeta40 , phosphorylated- tau181 , and total-tau. DISCUSSION: Sleep-dependent memory processing integrity in neural circuits can be measured for both SW-TB and SW-SP coupling. This breakdown associates with amyloid positivity, increased AD pathology, and cognitive impairment. HIGHLIGHTS: At-home sleep EEG is a potential biomarker of neural circuits linked to memory. Circuit precision is associated with amyloid positivity in asymptomatic aging adults. Levels of CSF amyloid and tau also correlate with circuit precision in sleep EEG. Theta burst EEG power is decreased in very early mild cognitive impairment. This technique may enable inexpensive wearable EEGs for monitoring brain health.

URL:


## Validity, feasibility, and effectiveness of a voice-recognition based digital cognitive screener for dementia and mild cognitive impairment in community-dwelling older Chinese adults: A large-scale implementation study.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated the validity, feasibility, and effectiveness of a voice recognition-based digital cognitive screener (DCS), for detecting dementia and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in a large-scale community of elderly participants. METHODS: Eligible participants completed demographic, cognitive, functional assessments and the DCS. Neuropsychological tests were used to assess domain-specific and global cognition, while the diagnosis of MCI and dementia relied on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale. RESULTS: Among the 11,186 participants, the DCS showed high completion rates (97.5%) and a short administration time (5.9 min) across gender, age, and education groups. The DCS demonstrated areas under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUCs) of 0.95 and 0.83 for dementia and MCI detection, respectively, among 328 participants in the validation phase. Furthermore, the DCS resulted in time savings of 16.2% to 36.0% compared to the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montral Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). DISCUSSION: This study suggests that the DCS is an effective and efficient tool for dementia and MCI case-finding in large-scale cognitive screening. HIGHLIGHTS: To our best knowledge, this is the first cognitive screening tool based on voice recognition and utilizing conversational AI that has been assessed in a large population of Chinese community-dwelling elderly. With the upgrading of a new multimodal understanding model, the DCS can accurately assess participants' responses, including different Chinese dialects, and provide automatic scores. The DCS not only exhibited good discriminant ability in detecting dementia and MCI cases, it also demonstrated a high completion rate and efficient administration regardless of gender, age, and education differences. The DCS is economically efficient, scalable, and had a better screening efficacy compared to the MMSE or MoCA, for wider implementation.

URL:


## Home monitoring of daily living activities and prediction of agitation risk in a cohort of people living with dementia.

BACKGROUND: People living with dementia (PLWD) have an increased susceptibility to developing adverse physical and psychological events. Internet of Things (IoT) technologies provides new ways to remotely monitor patients within the comfort of their homes, particularly important for the timely delivery of appropriate healthcare. Presented here is data collated as part of the on-going UK Dementia Research Institute's Care Research and Technology Centre cohort and Technology Integrated Health Management (TIHM) study. There are two main aims to this work: first, to investigate the effect of the COVID-19 quarantine on the performance of daily living activities of PLWD, on which there is currently little research; and second, to create a simple classification model capable of effectively predicting agitation risk in PLWD, allowing for the generation of alerts with actionable information by which to prevent such outcomes. METHOD: A within-subject, date-matched study was conducted on daily living activity data using the first COVID-19 quarantine as a natural experiment. Supervised machine learning approaches were then applied to combined physiological and environmental data to create two simple classification models: a single marker model trained using ambient temperature as a feature, and a multi-marker model using ambient temperature, body temperature, movement, and entropy as features. RESULT: There are 102 PLWD total included in the dataset, with all patients having an established diagnosis of dementia, but with ranging types and severity. The COVID-19 study was carried out on a sub-group of 21 patient households. In 2020, PLWD had a significant increase in daily household activity (p = 1.40e-08), one-way repeated measures ANOVA). Moreover, there was a significant interaction between the pandemic quarantine and patient gender on night-time bed-occupancy duration (p = 3.00e-02, two-way mixed-effect ANOVA). On evaluating the models using 10-fold cross validation, both the single and multi-marker model were shown to balance precision and recall well, having F1-scores of 0.80 and 0.66, respectively. CONCLUSION: Remote monitoring technologies provide a continuous and reliable way of monitoring patient day-to-day wellbeing. The application of statistical analyses and machine learning algorithms to combined physiological and environmental data has huge potential to positively impact the delivery of healthcare for PLWD.

URL: